Arm Cortex-M33 Processor Datasheet

Datasheet

Overview
The Arm Cortex-M33 processor is the first Armv8-M processor designed to address 

embedded and IoT markets especially those that require efficient security or digital signal 

control. Armv8-M introduces TrustZone which forms the foundation of security for embedded 

and IoT applications. The processor has specific features to increase processing at the endpoint 

such as a 20% increase in performance over the Cortex-M4, a Digital Signal Processing (DSP) 

extension, a Floating-point Unit (FPU), a coprocessor interface to offload compute intensive 

operations, and Arm Custom Instructions (ACI) to speed up specific operations. 

Features
Figure 1: Block diagram of Feature Description
the Cortex-M33 processor

Pipeline 3-stage

Optional TrustZone for Armv8-M, with optional security 
Software security attribution unit (SAU) of up to 8 regions

Stack limit checking

Optional DSP/SIMD instructions
Single-cycle 16/32-bit MAC

DSP extension
Single-cycle dual 16-bit MAC
8/16-bit SIMD arithmetic

Optional single-precision FPU
FPU

IEEE 754 compliant

Optional dedicated coprocessor bus interface for up to 8 
Coprocessor interface  

coprocessor units for custom compute

Arm Custom 
Custom data path to add custom instructions

Instructions

Optional Memory Protection Unit (MPU) with up to 16 regions 
Memory protection

per security state

Non-maskable Interrupt (NMI) and up to 480 physical interrupts 
Interrupts

with 8 to 256 priority levels

Wake-up Interrupt Optional for waking up the processor from state retention pow-
Controller (WIC) er gating or when all clocks are stopped

Integrated wait for event (WFE) and wait for interrupt (WFI) 
Sleep modes

instructions with Sleep On Exit functionality

Optional JTAG and Serial Wire Debug ports
Debug

Up to 8 Breakpoints and 4 Watchpoints

Optional Embedded Trace Macrocell (ETM), Micro Trace Buffer 
Trace (MTB), Data Watchpoint and Trace (DWT) and Instrumentation 

Trace Macrocell (ITM)

1



About the Processor
The Cortex-M33 processor has a low gate count, it is very energy-efficient and is  

intended for microcontroller and deeply embedded applications. The processor is  

based on the Armv8-M architecture and is suited for applications where security  

is an important consideration.

The interfaces that the processor supports include:

	 Code AHB (C-AHB) interface

	 System AHB (S-AHB) interface

	 External PPB (EPPB) APB interface

	 Debug AHB (D-AHB) interface 

The processor has optional:

  Arm TrustZone technology, using the Armv8-M security extension supporting 

      Secure and Non-secure states

  M PUs which you can configure to protect regions of memory

 Floating-point arithmetic functionality with support for single-precision arithmetic

 Support for ETM and MTB trace

 Arm Custom Instructions

The processor is highly configurable and is intended for a wide range of high-performance, 

deeply embedded applications that require fast interrupt response features.

Block Diagram

Figure 2: Cortex-M33 
processor components

2



Cortex-M33 Components
Processor Core

The processor core provides: 

  Limited dual-issue of common 16-bit instruction pairs

  Single cycle 32×32-bit multiplier

  Integer divide unit with support for operand-dependent early termination

  Support for interrupted continuable load and store multiple operations

  Load and store operations that both support precise bus errors

  To support Arm Custom Instruction, the processor core includes an optional  

     CDE module. This module is used to execute user-defined instructions that work  

     on general-purpose registers

Security Attribution and Memory Protection 

The Cortex-M33 processor supports the Armv8-M Protected Memory System Architecture 

(PMSA) that provides programmable support for memory protection using a number of 

software controllable regions. 

Memory regions can be programmed to generate faults when accessed inappropriately 

by unprivileged software reducing the scope of incorrectly written application code. 

The architecture includes fault status registers to allow an exception handler to determine 

the source of the fault and to apply corrective action or notify the system. 

The Cortex-M33 processor also includes optional support for defining memory regions as 

Secure or Non- secure, as defined in the Armv8-M security extension, and protecting the 

regions from accesses with an inappropriate level of security. 

Floating-point Unit 

The FPU provides: 

  Instructions for single-precision (C programming language float type)  

      data-processing operations

  Instructions for double-precision (C double type) load and store operations

  Combined multiply-add instructions for increased precision (Fused MAC)

  Hardware support for conversion, addition, subtraction, multiplication with optional 

      accumulate, division, and square-root

  Hardware support for denormals and all IEEE Standard 754-2008 rounding modes

  32 32-bit single-precision registers or 16 64-bit double-precision registers

  Lazy floating-point context save. Automated stacking of floating-point state is delayed 

     until the ISR attempts to execute a floating-point instruction. This reduces the latency 

     to enter the ISR and removes floating-point context save for ISRs that do not  

     use floating-point

3



  To support Arm Custom Instructions, the FPU includes an optional floating-point  

     CDE module. This module is used to execute user-defined instructions that work  

     on floating-point registers. If the optional FPU is not present, then the optional  

     floating-point CDE module is not present either

Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller 

The Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC) is closely integrated with the core  

to achieve low-latency interrupt processing. 

Functions of the NVIC include: 

  External interrupts, configurable from 1 to 480 using a contiguous or non-contiguous 

      mapping. This is configured at implementation

  Configurable levels of interrupt priority from 8 to 256. This is configured  

      at implementation. Dynamic reprioritization of interrupts

  Priority grouping. This enables selection of preempting interrupt levels 

      and non-preempting interrupt levels

  Support for tail-chaining and late arrival of interrupts. This enables back-to-backinterrupt 

      processing without the overhead of state saving and restoration between interrupts

  Optional support for the Armv8-M security extension. Secure interrupts can be 

      prioritized above any Non-secure interrupt

Coprocessor Interface 

The Cortex-M33 processor supports an external coprocessor interface which 

allows the integration of tightly coupled accelerator hardware with the processor.  

The programmers model allows software to communicate with the hardware using 

architectural coprocessor instructions. 

The external coprocessor interface: 

  Supports up to eight separate coprocessors, CP0-CP7, depending on your 

     implementation. The remaining coprocessor numbers, C8-C15, are reserved. CP10 

     and CP11 are always reserved for hardware floating-point. For more information,  

     see the Armv8-M Architecture Reference Manual

  Supports low-latency data transfer from the processor to and from 

      the accelerator components

  Has a sustained bandwidth up to twice of the processor memory interface

Cross Trigger Interface Unit 

The optional CTI enables the debug logic, micro trace buffer (MTB), and ETM to interact 

with each other and with other CoreSight components. 

4



ETM

The optional Embedded Trace Macrocell provides instruction-only capabilities when configured. 

See the Arm CoreSight ETM-M33 Technical Reference Manual for more information. 

Micro Trace Buffer 

The MTB provides a simple low-cost execution trace solution for the Cortex-M33 processor. 

Trace is written to an SRAM interface, and can be extracted using a dedicated AHB slave 

interface (M- AHB) on the processor. The MTB can be controlled by memory mapped registers 

in the PPB region or by events generated by the DWT or through the CTI. See the  

Arm CoreSight MTB-M33 Technical Reference Manual for more information. 

Debug and Trace 

Debug and trace components include a configurable Breakpoint Unit (BPU) for implementing 

breakpoints, and a configurable DWT unit for implementing watchpoints, data tracing,  

and system profiling. 

Other debug and trace components include optional ITM for support of printf() style 

debugging, using instrumentation trace. Interfaces are suitable for: 

  Passing on-chip data through a Trace Port Interface Unit (TPIU) to a Trace Port Analyzer 

     (TPA), including Serial Wire Output (SWO) mode

  A ROM table to allow debuggers to determine which components are implemented  

     in the Cortex-M33 processor

  Debugger access to all memory and registers in the system, including access  

     to memory-mapped devices, access to internal core registers when the core is halted, 

     and access to debug control registers even when reset is asserted

Interfaces 

The processor has various external interfaces.

  Code and System AHB Interfaces - Harvard AHB bus architecture supporting 

      exclusive transactions and security state.  

  System AHB Interface - The S-AHB interface is used for any instruction fetch  

     and data access to the memory-mapped SRAM, peripheral, external RAM 

     and external device, or vendor_SYS regions of the Armv8-M memory map. 

  Code AHB Interface - The C-AHB interface is used for any instruction fetch 

      and data access to the code region of the Armv8-M memory map.

  External Private Peripheral Bus - The EPPB APB interface enables access 

     to CoreSight- compatible debug and trace components in a system connected 

     to the processor.

  Secure Attribution Interface - The processor has an interface that connects 

      to an external Implementation Defined Attribution Unit (IDAU), which enables 

      your system to set security attributes based on address. 

5



  ATB Interfaces - The ATB interfaces output trace data for debugging.  

     The ATB interfaces are compatible with the CoreSight architecture. See the  

     Arm CoreSight Architecture Specification v3.0 for more information. The instruction  

     ATB interface is used by the optional ETM, and the instrumentation ATB interface 

     is used by the optional ITM.

  Micro Trace Buffer Interfaces - The MTB AHB slave interface and SRAM interface 

     are for the optional CoreSight Micro Trace Buffer. 

  Coprocessor Interface - The coprocessor interface is designed for closely coupled 

     external accelerator hardware.

  Debug AHB Interface - The D-AHB slave interface allows a debugger access to registers, 

     memory, and peripherals. The D-AHB interface provides debug access to the processor 

     and the complete memory map.

  Cross Trigger Interface - The processor includes an optional CTI Unit that has an 

     interface that is suitable for connection to external CoreSight components using a  

     Cross Trigger Matrix (CTM). 

  Power Control Interface - The processor optionally supports a number of internal power 

     domains which can be enabled and disabled using Q-channel interfaces connected to a 

     Power Management Unit (PMU) in the system. 

Arm Custom instructions
Arm introduces two sets of three classes of instruction extension in the coprocessor  

instruction space:

  Three classes operate on the general-purpose register file, including the condition  

     code flags NZCV

  Three classes operate on the floating-point/SIMD register file only

The three classes are defined by the following instruction patterns: 

  The destination register or the destination register pair of an instruction might be read,  

     as well as written (non-accumulator and accumulator variants)

  The operation code can be split between a true operation code in the custom datapath 

     and an immediate value used in the custom datapath

  Immediate consequences of the above are:

	 – No operations on the floating-point registers can set condition codes

	 – There are no operations using registers from both register files

  Operations on the general-purpose register file operate on 32-bit registers, or a  

     dual-register consisting of a 64-bit value constructed from an even-numbered,  

     general-purpose register and its immediately following odd pair

6



Instruction Assembly Inputs Outputs

General-purpose registers and NZCV flags
CX1{A} CX1{A}  Pn,{Rd,}Rd,#imm Immediate and 1x 32-bit GPR/NZCV {same as output} 1x 32-bit GPR or NZCV

CX2{A} CX2{A}  Pn,{Rd,}Rd,Rn,#imm Immediate and 2x 32-bit GPR/NZCV {one same as output} 1x 32-bit GPR or NZCV

CX3{A} CX3{A}  Pn,{Rd,}Rd,Rn,Rm,#imm Immediate and 3x 32-bit GPR/NZCV {one same as output} 1x 32-bit GPR or NZCV

CX1D{A} CX1D{A}  Pn,{Rd,}Rd,#imm Immediate and 1x 32-bit GPR/NZCV {two same as output} 2x 32-bit GPR

CX2D{A} CX2D{A}  Pn,{Rd,}Rd,Rn,#imm Immediate and 2x 32-bit GPR/NZCV {two same as output} 2x 32-bit GPR

CX3D{A} CX3D{A}  Pn,{Rd,}Rd,Rn,Rm,#imm Immediate and 3x 32-bit GPR/NZCV {two same as output} 2x 32-bit GPR

Vector registers
VCX1{A}.F VCX1{A}.F Pn,{Sd,}Sd,#imm Immediate and 1x 32-bit fp32 register {same as output} 1x 32-bit fp32 register

VCX2{A}.F VCX2{A}.F Pn,{Sd,}Sd,Sd,#imm Immediate and 2x 32-bit fp32 register {one same as output} 1x 32-bit fp32 register

VCX3{A}.F VCX3{A}.F Pn,{Sd,}Sd,Sn,Sm,#imm Immediate and 3x 32-bit fp32 register {one same as output} 1x 32-bit fp32 register

VCX1{A}.D VCX1{A}.D Pn,{Dd,}Dd,#imm Immediate and 1x 64-bit fp64 register {same as output} 1x 64-bit fp64 register

VCX2{A}.D VCX2{A}.D Pn,{Dd,}Dd,Dn,#imm Immediate and 2x 64-bit fp64 register {one same as output} 1x 64-bit fp64 register

VCX3{A}.D VCX3{A}.D Pn,{Dd,}Dd,Dn,Dm,#imm Immediate and 3x 64-bit fp64 register {one same as output} 1x 64-bit fp64 register

VCX1{A}.Q VCX1{A}.Q Pn,{Qd,}Qd,#imm Immediate and 1x 128-bit vector register {same as output} 1x 128-bit vector register

VCX2{A}.Q VCX2{A}.Q Pn,{Qd,}Qd,Qn,#imm Immediate and 2x 128-bit vector register {one same as output} 1x 128-bit vector register

VCX3{A}.Q VCX3{A}.Q Pn,{Qd,}Qd,Qn,Qm,#imm Immediate and 3x 128-bit vector register {one same as output} 1x 128-bit vector register

Pn Coprocessor number Sd Destination register (32-bit vector register)

A Accumulate Sn, Sm Input registers (32-bit vector registers)

Rd Destination register Dd Destination register (64-bit vector register)

Rn, Rm Input registers Dn, Dm Input registers (64-bit vector registers)

{ } Optional Qd Destination register (128-bit vector)

#imm Immediate value Qn, Qm Input registers (128-bit vector registers)

Cortex-M33 Pipeline

Figure 3: Cortex-M33 
processor pipeline

  3-stage pipeline

  Early termination of operation completing in DX

  Limited dual issue capability

  Five x 16-bit instruction queue

  Full Harvard memory interface

7



Corstone Reference Package
Corstone provides an ideal starting point for any SoC design, with the lowest risk and 

development cost. It includes various system IP components and a reference package 

integrating the processor, security and system IP, as well as a range of software  

and development tools.

Corstone features include:

  Implementation of an Arm-defined subsystem architecture

  Integration of the main components

  Extensively verified

  Broad software roadmap

  Build your SoC on top of it

  Configurable and modifiable

  Tailor it to specific needs

  Accelerates PSA Certified

  Silicon-proven

Figure 4: Corstone 
reference package diagram

8



Processor Configuration Options 
The Cortex-M33 processor has configurable options that you can set during the 

implementation and integration stages to match your functional requirements.  

Feature Options

No floating-point
Floating-point

Single-precision floating-point only 

No Armv8-M DSP Extension
DSP extension Armv8-M DSP extension supported, including the following 

instruction classes

No TrustZone for Armv8-M
TrustZone

TrustZone for Armv8-M security extension

Non-secure protected 
0 region, 4 regions, 8 regions, 12 regions, or 16 regions

memory regions

Secure protected memory 0 region, 4 regions, 8 regions, 12 regions, or 16 regions when 
regions TrustZone is included

Security Attribution Unit 0 region, 4 regions, or 8 regions when TrustZone is included
(SAU)

1-480 interrupts

Interrupts
To support non-contiguous mapping, you can remove 
individual interrupts

Number of bits of Between three and eight bits of interrupt priority, between 8 
interrupt priority and 256 levels of priority implemented

Minimal debug

No Halting debug or memory and peripheral access

Reduced set

Debug watchpoints and 
Two data watchpoint comparators and four breakpoint 

breakpoints
comparators

Full set

Four data watchpoint comparators and eight breakpoint 
comparators

ITM and DWT No ITM or DWT trace
functionality Complete ITM and DWT trace

No ETM support
ETM

ETM instruction execution trace

No MTB support
MTB

MTB instruction trace

No CTI
CTI

CTI included

No WIC controller
WIC

WIC controller included

External coprocessor No support for coprocessor hardware
interface Support for coprocessor hardware

Arm Custom Instructions The coprocessor executes instructions and the  
with Custom Datapath CDE modules are not used
Extension (CDE) modules The CDE module executes instructions and the  
on a coprocessor basis coprocessor is bypassed

9



Instruction Set
New Armv8-M 
instructions

Armv8-M

Armv8-M 
Baseline

Cortex-M23
Cortex-M33

Figure 5: Instruction set

10



Power, Performance and Area

DMIPS CoreMark/MHz

1.50 4.02

Configuration 40ULP 40LP 28HT 16FFC
Arm SC9 ELVT C40 SSG Arm SC9 RVT C50 SS Arm SC7MC PP140Z SVT Arm SC7P5MC PP96P SVT 
0.99V, -40°C 0.99V, -40°C HD C40 SSG 0.81V 0°C C16 SSGNP 0.72V 0°C

Area Power Area Power Area Power Area Power
mm2 mm2 mm2 mm2

µW/MHz µW/MHz µW/MHz µW/MHz

Minimum 0.026 12.6 0.028 12.0 0.011 5.6 0.008 3.9
Configuration*

Feature Rich with 0.093 17.1 0.097 17.4 0.039 7.9 0.026 5.4
TrustZone**

Max Freq 40LP 28HT 16FFC
Arm 40LP SC12 RVT C50 SS Arm CLN28HT SC9MC PP140Z Arm SC7P5MC PP96P SVT C16
0.99V, -40°C SVT C30 HD SSG 0.81V 0°C SSGNP 0.72V 0°C

Feature Rich Configuration 235 MHz (register to I/O) 614 MHz (register to I/O) 1028 MHz (register to I/O)
with TrustZone**

*FPU 0; DSP 0; SECEXT 0; CPIF 0; MPU_NS 0; MPU_S 0; SAU 0; NUMIRQ 1; IRQLVL 3; 
IRQLATENCY 4294967295; IRQDIS 0; DBGLVL 0; ITM 0; ETM 0; MTB 0; MTBAWIDTH 0; 
WIC 0; WICLINES 0; CTI 0; RAR 0;

**FPU 1; DSP 1; SECEXT 1; CPIF 0; MPU_NS 8; MPU_S 0; SAU 0; NUMIRQ 32; IRQLVL 3; 
IRQLATENCY 4294967295; IRQDIS 0; DBGLVL 2; ITM 1; ETM 1; MTB 0; MTBAWIDTH 0; 
WIC 1; WICLINES 35; CTI 0; RAR 0;

11



Additional Technical documents

1. Cortex-M33 Technical Reference Manual - TRM

2. Cortex-M33 Integration and Implementation Manual – available as part of the Bill of Materials

3. Armv8-M Architecture Reference Manual - Arm

4. CoreSight ETM‑M33 Technical Reference Manual - ETM

5. CoreSight MTB-M33 Technical Reference Manual - MTB

Glossary of Terms

ACI Arm Custom Instructions

AHB Advanced High-performance Bus

APB Advanced Peripheral Bus

ATB Advanced Trace Bus

BPU Breakpoint Unit

C-AHB Code AHB

CDE Custom Datapath Extension

CTI Cross Trigger Interface

CTM Cross Trigger Matrix

D-AHB Debug AHB

DSP Digital Signal Processing

DWT Data Watchpoint and Trace

EPPB External Private Peripheral Bus

ETM Instruction TraceEmbedded Trace Macrocell

FPU Floating-point Unit

IDAU Implementation Defined Attribution Unit

IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers

ISR Interrupt Service Routine

ITM Instrumentation Trace Macrocell

JTAG Joint Test Action Group

MAC Multiply and Accumulate

MPU Memory Protection Unit

MTB Micro Trace Buffer

NMI Non-maskable Interrupt

NVIC Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller

PMSA Protected Memory System Architecture

PMU Power Management Unit

PPB Private Peripheral Bus

PSA Platform Security Architecture

RAM Rand Access Memory

ROM Read Only Memory

S-AHB System AHB

12



SAU Security Attribution Unit

SIMD Single Instruction, Multiple Data

SRAM Static RAM

SWO Serial Wire Output

TPA Trace Port Analyzer

TPIU Trace Port Interface Unit

WFE Wait for Event

WFI Wait for Interrupt

WIC Wake-up Interrupt Controller

Contact Details
UK Europe Japan Taiwan China
Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com

USA Asia Pacific Korea Israel India
Salesinfo-us@Arm.com Salesinfo-us@Arm.com Salesinfo-us@Arm.com Salesinfo-us@Arm.com Salesinfo-us@Arm.com

 	 All brand names or product names are the property of their respective holders. Neither the whole nor any part of the 
information contained in, or the product described in, this document may be adapted or reproduced in any material form except with  
the prior written permission of the copyright holder. The product described in this document is subject to continuous developments  
and improvements. All particulars of the product and its use contained in this document are given in good faith. All warranties implied  
or expressed, including but not limited to implied warranties of satisfactory quality or fitness for purpose are excluded. This document  
is intended only to provide information to the reader about the product. To the extent permitted by local laws Arm shall not be liable  
for any loss or damage arising from the use of any information in this document or any error or omission in such information.

	 © Arm Ltd. 2022

13