Arm Cortex-M55 Processor Datasheet

 

February, 2020 Datasheet 

Overview
The Arm Cortex-M55 processor is a fully synthesizable, mid-range, microcontroller-class 

processor that implements the Armv8.1‑M mainline architecture and includes support for 

the M‑profile Vector Extension (MVE), also known as Arm Helium technology. It’s Arm’s 

most AI-capable Cortex-M processor, delivering enhanced, energy-efficient digital signal 

processing (DSP) and machine learning (ML) performance. The Cortex-M55 processor 

achieves high compute performance across scalar and vector operations, while maintaining 

low energy consumption. 

 

Features
Feature Description

Architecture Armv8.1-M
Bus interface AMBA 5 AXI5 64-bit master (compatible to AXI4 IPs)

Figure 1: 
Pipeline 4-stages (for main integer pipeline)

Block diagram of the 
Cortex-M55 processor Security Arm TrustZone technology (optional)

DSP Extension 32-bit DSP/SIMD Extension
MVE Helium (optional)
Floating-point Unit FPU (optional)
Coprcessor Interface 64-bit (optional)
Instruction cache Up to 64KB with error correction code  

(ECC) (optional)
Data cache Up to 64KB with ECC (optional)
Instruction TCM (ITCM) Up to 16MB with ECC (optional)
Data TCM (DTCM) Up to 16MB with ECC (optional)
Interrupts Up to 480 interrupts + Non-maskable interrupt (NMI)
Wake-up Interrupt  Internal and/or external (optional)
Controller (WIC)
Multiply-accumulate (MAC) / cycle Up to: 

2 x 32-bit MACs/cycle 
4 x 16-bit MACs/cycle 
8 x 8-bit MACs/cycle

Sleep modes Multiple power domains, sleep modes (sleep and deep sleep), sleep-on-
exit, optional retention support for memories and logic

Debug Hardware and software breakpoints, Performance Monitoring Unit 
(PMU)

1



Trace Optional Instruction trace with Embedded Trace Macrocell (ETM) 
Data Trace (DWT) (selective data trace, profiling and event trace) Instru-
mentation Trace (ITM) (software trace)

Arm Custom Instructions Optional (available in 2021)

About the Processor
The Cortex-M55 processor is a fully synthesizable, mid-range processor that is designed 

for the microcontroller and deeply embedded systems market. The processor offers 

high compute performance across both scalar and vector operations with low energy 

consumption, fast interrupt handling, and enhanced system debug that includes extensive 

breakpoint and trace capabilities.  

Interfaces supported by the processor include: 

        Master AXI (M-AXI)

	 Slave AHB (S-AHB) for TCM

	 Peripheral AHB (P-AHB) 

	 External PPB (EPPB) APB 

	 Debug AHB (D-AHB) 

	 External Implementation Defined Attribution Unit (IDAU) 

	 ITM and ETM trace bus 

	 Coprocessor 

	 Cross Trigger Interface (CTI) 

	 Power control

	 ITCM and DTCM 

 

The processor has optional: 

	 Arm Helium technology

	 Floating-point arithmetic functionality with support for scalar half, single, and double-	

	 precision floating-point operation

	 Arm TrustZone technology, using the Armv8-M security extension supporting Secure 	

	 and Non-secure states 

	 L1 instruction and data caches 

	 Memory Protection Units that you can configure to protect regions of memory

	 Breakpoint Unit 

	 Data Watchpoint and Trace unit

	 Instrumentation Trace Macrocell 

	 Performance Monitoring Unit 

	 Support for ETM trace

	 Arm Custom Instructions (available in 2021) 

2



Block Diagram
Helium and floating point unit (optional)
Vector integer, HP + SP float

Configurable top-level— Scalar HP + Single + DP TrustZone
optional internal or 64-bit coprocessor interface for 
external WIC Tightly coupled accelerators 

Fully compatible to Cortex-M33

Interrupts External or Internal
WIC WIC NVIC Helium/FPU MPU

SAU CP Coprocessor
In order 4-stage pipeline with limited T16+T16
dual issue. 32 bit fetch 64-bit load/store

CPU AHBP AHB
Mainline implentation

TCM 32-bit AHB master for low
latency on-chip peripherals

DWT
Fast on-chip SRAM ITM BPU
Deterministic memory access DAP
DMA I/F for efficient data-plane processing JTAG or SWD
ITCM interface to CODE region
DTCM interfaces to SRAM region I Cache D Cache
Data and instruction access on all interfaces
Support for ECC ETM TPIU 

DMA AMBA5 AXI-5 ETM (optional) 
Master Instruction trace only

Instruction cache (optional)
Size configurable up to 64KB 
Support for ECC

Data cache (optional)
64-bit AMBA5 AX15 master interface Size configurable up to 64KB
Flash/ off-chip memory (e.g DDR) / slow peripherals External Memory Interface Support for WT/WB, ECC
Including support for RAS feature —
AxPOISON and AxDATACHK

Figure 2: Cortex-M55 
processor components Cortex-M55 Components

Processor Overview
The Cortex-M55 processor is based on a 4-stage integer pipeline design, and when Helium 

vector extension is included, the vector engine increases the total pipeline stages to five. 

The pipeline is fully in-order (i.e. no out-of-order execution) and supports a small amount  

of dual-issue capability.

The instruction set supported in the Cortex-M55 processor is Armv8.1-M (with Mainline 

extension) and is available with optional Helium and floating-point instruction support.  

If Helium is not included, Armv8.1-M provides a number of new instructions not available 

in Armv8.0-M. For example, some of the low-overhead-branch instructions features are 

available across all configurations. 

The Cortex-M55 processor supports the Arm TrustZone security extension. This makes the 

Cortex-M55 processor suitable for a range of IoT applications where security is essential  

to protect secret crypto keys, high-value algorithms and other trade secrets. 

3

TCM arbitter
and interface AHB Slave



Helium
Helium, the vector processing extension adds over 150 new scalar and vector instructions, 

enabling the efficient compute of 8-bit, 16-bit and 32-bit fixed-point data. From instruction-

set support, there are five combinations: 

Config FPU Helium Helium
Data type: scalar float (fp16, Data type: vectored fixed-point Data type: vectored float-
fp32, fp64) (8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit) ing-point (fp16, fp32)

1 - - -

2 Included - -

3 - Included -

4 Included Included -

5 Included Included Included

These options allow SoC designers to customize the Cortex-M55 processor design to fit 

their specific application needs.

 
Floating-point
The Cortex-M55 FPU support is based on Arm FPv5 architecture which is fully IEEE-754 

compliant. When the FPU is included, the Cortex-M55 processor supports scalar float-point 

instructions for data format of half-precision (16-bit, fp16), single-precision (32-bit, fp32), 

and double-precision (64-bit, fp64). 

 

Memory Security Management 
The Cortex-M55 processor contains several units that control access to the memory. 

 

Memory Protection Unit
The MPU supports the Arm Protected Memory System Architecture (PMSA), which allows 

privileged software to define memory attributes (e.g. cache-ability) of different address 

ranges, and to define memory access permissions of unprivileged software components.  

For example, an RTOS can control the accessible memory ranges for each unprivileged 

threads at context switching, If an unprivileged thread accesses a memory location 

containing privileged data, or a memory location private to another unprivileged thread, 

an access violation fault exception is triggered so the RTOS can manage the situation. The 

architecture includes fault status registers to allow an exception handler to determine the 

source of the fault and to apply corrective action or notify the system. If TrustZone  

is implemented, the entire MPU logic can be split into Secure and Non-secure MPU regions. 

 

Security Attribution Unit 
When TrustZone is included, the Security Attribution Unit (SAU) defines and authenticates 

accesses to memory based on the security state of the core or the debugger. 

 

This allows the memory space to be partitioned into Secure and Non-secure regions. 

The SAU in the Cortex-M55 processor supports up to eight regions, and also supports 

the addition of custom-defined attribution mapping using the Implementation Defined 

Attribution Unit (IDAU) interface to extend the number of security regions.

4



TCM Gate Unit
When the TrustZone security extension is included, the TCM Gate Unit (TGU) controls 

software and Slave AHB (S-AHB) accesses the TCMs based on the security attribute of the 

access. This allows the TCMs to be partitioned into Secure and Non-secure portions and 

to be compliant with requirements outlined in the Trusted Based System Architecture for 

M-profile (TBSA-M), which is a part of Platform Security Architecture (PSA).

Interface to Custom Defined Attribution Mapping (the IDAU interface)
DAUs are custom defined hardware unit that allows additional security regions to be defined 

in a TrustZone system and are present outside the processor. This unit defines memory 

regions as being either Secure, Non-secure, Non-secure Callable, or exempt from security 

checking. The final security mapping of memory regions is a combination of the response 

from the SAU and IDAU.

Memory System 
The Cortex-M55 processor memory system provides the interface between the processor 

and the RAMs, external memory interfaces, and internal memory-mapped registers.

The memory system includes:

        A single interface to an ITCM and four interfaces to DTCMs, D0TCM, D1TCM,         

			    D2TCM, and D3TCM

	 Master AXI (M-AXI) interface for high latency on-chip or off-chip memory 

	 and slow devices

	 P-AHB for access to external peripherals

	 S-AHB for system access to the TCMs

	 L1 instruction cache

	 L1 data cache

	 EPPB APB interface for CoreSight debug and trace components

	 A Store Buffer (STB) to hold store operations when they have left the load/store

	 pipeline and the DPU has committed them. From the STB, a store can do either of the

	 following:

		  - Request access to the cache RAM through the Data Cache Unit (DCU)

		  - Request the Bus Interface Unit (BIU) to initiate line fills

		  - Request the BIU to write data on the AXI5 master interface 

If several store transactions are associated with the same 64-bit aligned doubleword, the 

STB can merge these store transactions into a single transaction.

5



Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller  
The Cortex-M55 processor NVIC is closely integrated with the processor to achieve  

low-latency interrupt processing. 

The NVIC is responsible for: 

        Maintaining the current execution priority of the Cortex-M55 processor                    	

        Maintaining the pending and active status of all exceptions that are supported

	 Invoking pre-emption when a pending exception has priority 

	 Providing wake up signals to wake up the Cortex-M55 processor from deep sleep mode 

	 Providing support to the Internal Wake-up Interrupt Controller (IWIC) and External 	

	 Wake-up Interrupt Controller (EWIC) 

	 Providing priority and exception information to other processor components 

 

The NVIC in the Cortex-M55 processor allows up 480 external interrupts, an NMI and 

several built-in system exceptions. 

 

Wake-up Interrupt Controller  
The Cortex-M55 processor supports a WIC unit that allows the Cortex-M55 processor  

to enter a low-power state. 

 

Two WICs are supported:

	 IWIC - synchronous with the processor and contained within the Cortex-M55

	 processor boundary,

	 EWIC – a system-level component that can be asynchronous to the Cortex-

	 M55 processor 

 

The Cortex-M55 processor supports either no WIC, IWIC, EWIC, or both IWIC and EWIC 
 
Coprocessor Interface 
The Cortex-M55 processor supports an optional coprocessor interface which allows the 

integration of tightly coupled accelerator hardware with the processor. The programmer 

model allows the software to communicate with the hardware using architectural 

coprocessor instructions. 

 

The external coprocessor interface supports up to eight separate coprocessors, CP0-

CP7, depending on the implementation. The remaining coprocessor numbers, C8-C15, 

are reserved. CP10 and CP11 are always reserved for hardware floating-point. For more 

information, see the Armv8-M Architecture Reference Manual. Supports low-latency data 

transfer from the processor to and from the accelerator components.

6



Debug and trace components
The Cortex-M55 processor has optional and configurable debug and trace components.  

Breakpoint Unit
A configurable BPU for implementing breakpoints. 

Data Watchpoint and Trace
A configurable DWT unit for implementing watchpoints, data tracing and system profiling. 

Instrumentation Trace Macrocell
An optional ITM that supports printf() style debugging using instrumentation trace. 

Performance Monitoring Unit
A PMU which enables software to gather statistics on events taking place on the 

Cortex-M55 processor. These statistics can be used for performance analysis and system 

debug. The PMU is always present when the DWT is present. 

ROM Tables
ROM tables allow debuggers to determine which CoreSight components are implemented  

in the Cortex-M55 processor. 

Debug and Trace Interfaces
These interfaces are suitable for:

	 Passing on-chip data through a Trace Port Interface Unit (TPIU) to a Trace Port Analyzer 

	 (TPA), including Serial Wire Output (SWO) mode

	 Integrating a Debug Access Port (DAP), which is a debug port that is used to control 

	 debug functionality

	 Integrating a CoreSight Embedded Trace Buffer (ETB), which is an optional licensable 

	 component for trace data to be written to an external SRAM 

 

Cross Trigger Interface
The optional Cross Trigger Interface (CTI) enables the debug logic and ETM to interact with 

each other and with other CoreSight components. 

 

PMC-100
PMC-100 is an optional on-line MBIST controller that is used to test RAMs, ECC logic, and 

any other associated logic. 

SBIST Controller
The SBIST controller is an optional component that is used to facilitate the testing of 

functional logic (excluding memories).

 
7



Cortex-M55 Interfaces
Name Protocol Width Details

Master AXI AMBA 5 AXI 64-bit Provides efficient access to high-latency memory 
master interface and peripheral components in the system.

Instruction Tightly - 32-bit One ITCM interface and four DTCM interfaces 
Coupled Memory and to support efficient and high-bandwidth access 
Data Tightly Coupled from the Cortex-M55 processor and Slave AHB 
Memory (S-AHB) interface to local low-latency memory. 

The ITCM is mapped to the code memory region 
and the DTCMs are mapped to the SRAM memory 
region. Access to ITCM is through the 32-bit 
wide ITCM interface. Access to DTCM is through 
the 32-bit wide D0TCM, D1TCM, D2TCM, and 
D3TCM interfaces. The size of both TCM instances 
is configurable, and in the range of 4KB-16MB 
in powers of 2. The Cortex-M55 processor also 
supports zero size TCMs.

AHB slave port AMBA 5 AHB 64-bit Provides system access to the TCMs. The DMA 
engine typically uses this interface.

Tightly coupled master AMBA 5 AHB 32-bit Provides efficient access to system peripherals.
Peripheral AHB 
interface

External Private AMBA 4 APB 32-bit Used to connect to external CoreSight-compliant 
Peripheral Bus peripherals
interface

External IDAU interface - - Allows the system to define security attributes

ITM and ETM interfaces AMBA 4 ATB 8-bit Provides tracing capability

Coprocessor interface - 64-bit Used for closely coupled external accelerator 
hardware

Debug AHB slave AMBA 5 AHB 32-bit Provides debug access to registers, memory, and 
interface peripherals

Optional Cross Trigger - Four  Used for debug and trace synchronization
Interface interface channels 

Power control interface Low-power - Optional support for internal power domains which 
P-Channel can be enabled and disabled using the P-Channel 
and Q-Channel and Q-Channel interfaces connected to a power 

controller in the system

External Wake-up - - Provides access to an optional EWIC, which is 
Interrupt Controller peripheral to the system and is suitable for sleep 
interface states where the entire processor subsystem is 

powered down

Cortex-M55 Supporting IP
Arm Ethos-U55 microNPU
The Ethos-U55 is the industry’s first microNPU designed for microcontroller-class devices. 

It is integrated with a single Cortex-M toolchain to provide exceptional performance uplift 

without additional software complexity. Combine the Cortex-M55 processor with the 

Ethos-U55 to deliver up to 480x uplift in ML performance over previous generation Cortex-M 

processors. 

8



Arm Corstone-300 Reference Design 
The Arm Corstone-300 is the ultimate starting point for integrating the Cortex-M55 and 

the Ethos-U55 (optional) processors into an SoC with the lowest risk and development cost. 

It includes various system IP components and a reference design integrating the processor, 

security and system IP, as well as a range of software and development tools.  

The Corstone-300 simplifies security implementation with an optimized AXI5 system for 

Arm TrustZone technology, and easier porting to Trusted Firmware-M, accelerating the 

route to PSA Certified silicon and devices. 

	

	 Implementation of an Arm-defined system architecture

	 Integration of the main components	

	 Extensively verified

	 Broad software roadmap

	 Build your SoC on top of it

	 Configurable and modifiable

	 Tailor it to specific needs

	 Accelerates PSA Certified

	 Silicon-proven 

 

Figure 3: Corstone reference design diagram

Processor Configuration Options
The Cortex-M55 processor has configurable options that can be set during the 

implementation and integration stages to match functional requirements

Feature Options

Floating-point Floating-point 
Floating-point included

MVE when floating-point is not Helium included 
included Integer subset of Helium included
MVE when floating-point  Helium not included
is included

Integer subset of Helium included

Integer, half-precision and single-precision Helium included

9



TrustZone No TrustZone for Armv8-M security extension
TrustZone for Armv8-M security extension

Coprocessor No support for coprocessor hardware
Support for coprocessor hardware

Secure MPU 0 region, 4 regions, 8 regions, 12 regions, or 16 regions when TrustZone 
is included

SAU 0 region, 4 regions, or 8 regions when TrustZone is included
Instruction cache No ICU 

ICU included and size can be 4KB, 8KB, 16KB, 32KB,  
or 64KB

Data cache Area optimized M-AXI interface, no DCU
DCU included and size can be 4KB, 8KB, 16KB, 32KB, or 64KB

Error correcting code No ECC on cache or TCMs
ECC on all implemented caches and TCMs

Interrupts 1-480 interrupts + NMI
Exception priority bits 3-8 priority bits

Lowest interrupt latency interrupt Lowest latency 
numbers One additional latency cycle
Debug resources Minimal debug

Reduced set
Full set

Instrumentation Trace Macrocell and No ITM and DWT trace
Data Watchpoint Trace Complete ITM and DWT trace
Embedded Trace Macrocell No ETM support

ETM support
Cross Trigger Interface No CTI

CTI included
Internal Wake-up Interrupt Controller No IWIC

IWIC included
Interface protection No interface protection

Interface protection included
ICTM security gating No ICTM security gate

ICTM security gate included
PMC100 No Programmable MBIST Controller 

(PMC-100)

PMC-100 included

Number of PMC-100 program 2-32
registers
Reset all registers functionality Only reset states that architecture requires

Reset all synchronous states

Supporting technical documents coming soon. Learn more about the Cortex-M55 
processor here. 

10



Glossary of Terms
BIU Bus Interface Unit

BPU Breakpoint Unit

CTI Cross Trigger Interface

D-AHB Debug AHB

DAP Debug Access Port

DCU Data Cache Unit

DMA Direct Memory Access

DP Double-precision

DPU Data Processing Unit

DSP Digital Signal Processing

DTCM Data Tightly Coupled Memory

DWT Data Watchpoint and Trace

ECC Error Correcting Code

EPPB External Private Peripheral Bus

ETB Embedded Trace Buffer

ETM Embedded Trace Macrocell

EWIC External Wakeup Interrupt Controller

FPU Floating Point Unit

HP Half-precision

ICU Instruction Cache Unit

IDAU Implementation Defined Attribution Unit

IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers

IT Instruction Trace

ITCM Instruction Tightly Coupled Memory

ITM Instrumentation Trace Macrocell

IWIC Internal Wakeup Interrupt Controller

JTAG Joint Test Action Group

M-AXI Master AXI

MAC Multiply-accumulate Cycle

MBIST Memory Built-in Self-Test

ML Machine Learning

MPU Memory Protection Unit

MVE M-Profile Vector Extension

NMI Non-maskable Interrupt

NPU Neural Processing Unit

NVIC Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller

P-AHB Peripheral AHB

PMSA Protected Memory System Architecture

PMU Performance Monitoring Unit

PSA Platform Security Architecture

RAS Reliability, Availability and Serviceability

ROM Read-only Memory

S-AHB Slave AHB

SAU Security Attribution Unit

SBIST Software Built-In Self-Test

11



SIMD Single Instruction, Multiple Data

SP Single-precision

SRAM Static Random Access Memory

STB Store Buffer

SWO Serial Wire Output

TBSA-M Trusted Based System Architecture for M-Profile

TCM Tightly Coupled Memory

TGU TCM Gate Unit

TPA Trace Port Analyzer

TPIU Trace Port Interface Unit

WB/WT Write-back and Write-through

WIC Wake-up Interrupt Controller

Contact details

UK  Europe Japan  Taiwan China 
Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com Salesinfo-eu@Arm.com

USA Asia Pacific Korea Israel India 
Salesinfo-us@Arm.com Salesinfo-us@Arm.com Salesinfo-us@Arm.com Salesinfo-us@Arm.com Salesinfo-us@Arm.com 

 	 All brand names or product names are the property of their respective holders. Neither the whole nor any part of the 
information contained in, or the product described in, this document may be adapted or reproduced in any material form except with 
the prior written permission of the copyright holder. The product described in this document is subject to continuous developments 
and improvements. All particulars of the product and its use contained in this document are given in good faith. All warranties implied  
or expressed, including but not limited to implied warranties of satisfactory quality or fitness for purpose are excluded. This document  
is intended only to provide information to the reader about the product. To the extent permitted by local laws Arm shall not be liable  
for any loss or damage arising from the use of any information in this document or any error or omission in such information.

	 © Arm Ltd. 2020

12